# Integrated Development Environments

Now that you have learned about the building blocks of a LilyPond toolchain it
is time to get acquainted with the concept of [Integrated Development
Environments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_development_environment).
This idea is very  common in the world of software development but maybe
completely new to someone used to graphical document editing tools.  In short an
IDE is an application that *integrates* all the tools needed for (software)
*development* in a single consistent *environment*.  From a practical
perspective you are facing a (windowed) GUI application that provides you with
all the tools you need, offering an extended input text editor, managing the use
of LilyPond and displaying the generated score.  For most people this is the
preferred way to work with LilyPond.

So if such an integrated application is considered the way to go, why are we
complaining about the “monolithic GUI application” concept?  Well, there are
significant conceptual and practical differences at work.  If you are working
with *Finale* or *Sibelius* you are working with - *Finale* or *Sibelius*.  An
IDE around LilyPond on the other hand allows you to configure the parts of the
toolchain independently, and more importantly you are free to switch your tools
and working environments at any moment, even multiple times (or for certain
tasks) within a project.

Currently there are two major IDEs available for working with LilyPond, both
with distinct goals and approaches: [Frescobaldi](../ide/frescobaldi.html) and
[Denemo](../ide/denemo.html).  Additionally there are a number of
[other](../ide/other.html) IDEs and IDE-like tools which have somewhat less
impact but may also provide interesting approaches such as online editing of
scores..

{% credits %}{% endcredits %}
